docs/implementation/memory-integration.md, before:

# Memory Integration Summary

## Overview
This document summarizes the memory feature integration into HAssistant. The memory system is now fully integrated and operational.

## What Was Integrated

### 1. **Letta Bridge API Enhancements**
   - ✅ Added `/memory/maintenance` endpoint for automatic memory cleanup
   - ✅ Existing endpoints remain functional:
     - `POST /memory/add` - Add new memories
     - `GET /memory/search` - Search memories semantically
     - `POST /memory/pin` - Pin/unpin memories
     - `POST /memory/forget` - Forget memories
     - `GET /daily_brief` - Get recent important memories
     - `GET /healthz` - Health check
     - `GET /metrics` - Metrics endpoint

### 2. **Home Assistant Configuration**
   - ✅ Enhanced REST commands in `configuration.yaml`:
     - `rest_command.letta_add_memory` - Add memories from automations
     - `rest_command.letta_memory_maintenance` - Run cleanup
   - ✅ Sensor for memory monitoring:
     - `sensor.letta_daily_brief` - Tracks recent memories

### 3. **Active Automations**
   - ✅ **Daily Memory Maintenance** (`letta_memory_maintenance`)
     - Runs at 3:00 AM daily
     - Cleans up old memories based on tier retention policies
     - Prevents database bloat
   
   - ✅ **Log Important State Changes** (`letta_log_important_events`)
     - Tracks presence changes (home/away)
     - Saves to medium-term memory
     - Auto-tagged with context

### 4. **Documentation**
   - ✅ Created `MEMORY_INTEGRATION.md` - Comprehensive guide
   - ✅ Updated `README.md` - Added memory system to features
   - ✅ Architecture diagram updated

### 5. **Example Code**
   - ✅ `example_memory_client.py` - Python client demonstrating:
     - Basic memory operations
     - Conversation logging
     - User preference storage
     - Search functionality

### 6. **Testing**
   - ✅ All syntax validated
   - ✅ Integration tests created and passing
   - ✅ YAML configuration validated
   - ✅ Python code syntax checked

## Memory System Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│           Home Assistant Application                 │
│  ┌───────────────────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │  Automations (automations.yaml)               │  │
│  │  - Daily Maintenance (3 AM)                   │  │
│  │  - State Change Logging                       │  │
│  └─────────────────┬─────────────────────────────┘  │
│                    │ REST Commands                   │
│                    ▼                                 │
│  ┌───────────────────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │  REST Commands (configuration.yaml)           │  │
│  │  - letta_add_memory                          │  │
│  │  - letta_memory_maintenance                  │  │
│  └─────────────────┬─────────────────────────────┘  │
└────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────────┘
                     │ HTTP API
                     ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│           Letta Bridge API (Port 8081)              │
│  ┌───────────────────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │  FastAPI Endpoints (main.py)                  │  │
│  │  - /memory/add                                │  │
│  │  - /memory/search (semantic)                  │  │
│  │  - /memory/pin                                │  │
│  │  - /memory/forget                             │  │
│  │  - /memory/maintenance ← NEW                  │  │
│  │  - /daily_brief                               │  │
│  └─────────────────┬─────────────────────────────┘  │
└────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────────┘
                     │
         ┌───────────┴──────────┐
         ▼                      ▼
┌─────────────────┐    ┌─────────────────┐
│   PostgreSQL    │    │     Redis       │
│   + pgvector    │    │   (Cache)       │
│                 │    │                 │
│ - memory_blocks │    │ - Cooldowns     │
│ - embeddings    │    │ - Ephemeral     │
│ - agent_state   │    │                 │
└─────────────────┘    └─────────────────┘
```

## Memory Tiers & Retention

| Tier       | Retention | Auto-evicts | Use Case                |
|------------|-----------|-------------|-------------------------|
| session    | 1 hour    | Yes         | Temporary conversation  |
| short_term | 7 days    | Yes         | Recent events           |
| medium_term| 30 days   | Yes         | Important patterns      |
| long_term  | 365 days  | Yes         | Significant events      |
| permanent  | Forever   | No          | Critical information    |

## Data Flow Example

### Adding a Memory
1. **Trigger**: User comes home (person.home_owner: away → home)
2. **Automation**: `letta_log_important_events` triggers
3. **REST Command**: Calls `rest_command.letta_add_memory`
4. **API**: POST to `/memory/add` with:
   ```json
   {
     "title": "Presence Change: Home Owner",
     "content": "Home Owner changed from away to home at 2024-01-15 18:30:00",
     "tags": ["presence", "automation", "home_state"],
     "source": ["ha://person.home_owner"],
     "tier": "medium",
     "type": "event"
   }
   ```
5. **Database**: Memory stored in PostgreSQL
6. **Embedding**: Vector embedding generated for semantic search
7. **Redis**: Cooldown marker set (60 seconds)

### Daily Maintenance
1. **Trigger**: 3:00 AM daily
2. **Automation**: `letta_memory_maintenance` triggers
3. **REST Command**: Calls `rest_command.letta_memory_maintenance`
4. **API**: POST to `/memory/maintenance`
5. **Database**: Executes `evict_old_memories()` function
6. **Cleanup**: Removes memories based on:
   - Tier retention policies
   - last_used_at timestamps
   - Pin status (pinned memories never evicted)

## Performance Improvements

### Database Efficiency
- **Tiered Storage**: Old, unused memories automatically removed
- **Indexed Searches**: Fast retrieval with proper indexes
- **Vector Search**: Semantic similarity using pgvector

### Application Benefits
- **Context Retention**: LLM can reference past interactions
- **Pattern Learning**: System learns user preferences over time
- **Smart Eviction**: Important memories kept, noise removed
- **Resource Management**: Prevents unbounded growth

## Usage Examples

### From Home Assistant Automations
```yaml
- service: rest_command.letta_add_memory
  data:
    title: "Temperature Alert"
    content: "Living room reached 25°C"
    tier: "short"
    type: "event"
```

### From Python
```python
from example_memory_client import LettaMemoryClient

client = LettaMemoryClient()
client.add_memory(
    title="User Preference",
    content="Prefers warm lighting in evening",
    type="preference",
    tier="long",
    pin=True
)
```

### From curl
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8081/memory/add \
  -H "x-api-key: dev-key" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "title": "Quick Note",
    "content": "Remember to check garden sensors",
    "type": "task"
  }'
```

## Security Considerations

1. **API Key Authentication**: All endpoints require valid `x-api-key` header
2. **Internal Network**: Services communicate on private Docker network
3. **Database Credentials**: Secured via environment variables
4. **No External Access**: Memory system not exposed to internet by default

## Next Steps / Future Enhancements

1. **LLM Integration**: Direct integration with Ollama for memory summarization
2. **Smart Promotion**: Automatically promote frequently accessed memories
3. **Deduplication**: Merge similar memories to reduce redundancy
4. **Visualization**: Dashboard for viewing memory hierarchy
5. **Backup/Restore**: Tools for exporting/importing memory snapshots
6. **Analytics**: Memory usage metrics and insights

## Troubleshooting

### Check if services are running
```bash
docker ps | grep -E "(letta-bridge|postgres|redis)"
```

### View logs
```bash
docker logs hassistant-letta-bridge
docker logs hassistant-postgres
docker logs hassistant-redis
```

### Test connectivity
```bash
curl http://localhost:8081/healthz
```

### Check database
```bash
docker exec -it hassistant-postgres psql -U hassistant -d hassistant -c "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM memory_blocks;"
```

## References

- **Main Documentation**: [MEMORY_INTEGRATION.md](MEMORY_INTEGRATION.md)
- **API Source**: [letta_bridge/main.py](letta_bridge/main.py)
- **Database Schema**: [scripts/02_letta_schema.sql](scripts/02_letta_schema.sql)
- **HA Config**: [ha_config/configuration.yaml](ha_config/configuration.yaml)
- **Automations**: [ha_config/automations.yaml](ha_config/automations.yaml)
- **Example Client**: [example_memory_client.py](example_memory_client.py)

---

**Integration completed**: All components tested and working
**Status**: ✅ Production Ready

Commit message:

Harmonize shared voice/vision integration across services

docs/implementation/memory-integration.md, after:

# Memory Integration Summary

## Overview
This document summarizes the memory feature integration into HAssistant. The memory system is now fully integrated and operational.

## What Was Integrated

### 1. **Letta Bridge API Enhancements**
   - ✅ Added `/memory/maintenance` endpoint for automatic memory cleanup
   - ✅ Existing endpoints remain functional:
     - `POST /memory/add` - Add new memories
     - `GET /memory/search` - Search memories semantically
     - `POST /memory/pin` - Pin/unpin memories
     - `POST /memory/forget` - Forget memories
     - `GET /daily_brief` - Get recent important memories
     - `GET /healthz` - Health check
     - `GET /metrics` - Metrics endpoint

### 2. **Home Assistant Configuration**
   - ✅ Enhanced REST commands in `configuration.yaml`:
     - `rest_command.letta_add_memory` - Add memories from automations
     - `rest_command.letta_memory_maintenance` - Run cleanup
   - ✅ Sensor for memory monitoring:
     - `sensor.letta_daily_brief` - Tracks recent memories

### 3. **Active Automations**
   - ✅ **Daily Memory Maintenance** (`letta_memory_maintenance`)
     - Runs at 3:00 AM daily
     - Cleans up old memories based on tier retention policies
     - Prevents database bloat
   
   - ✅ **Log Important State Changes** (`letta_log_important_events`)
     - Tracks presence changes (home/away)
     - Saves to medium-term memory
     - Auto-tagged with context

### 4. **Documentation**
   - ✅ Created `MEMORY_INTEGRATION.md` - Comprehensive guide
   - ✅ Updated `README.md` - Added memory system to features
   - ✅ Architecture diagram updated

### 5. **Example Code**
   - ✅ `example_memory_client.py` - Python client demonstrating:
     - Basic memory operations
     - Conversation logging
     - User preference storage
     - Search functionality

### 6. **Testing**
   - ✅ All syntax validated
   - ✅ Integration tests created and passing
   - ✅ YAML configuration validated
   - ✅ Python code syntax checked

## Memory System Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│           Home Assistant Application                 │
│  ┌───────────────────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │  Automations (automations.yaml)               │  │
│  │  - Daily Maintenance (3 AM)                   │  │
│  │  - State Change Logging                       │  │
│  └─────────────────┬─────────────────────────────┘  │
│                    │ REST Commands                   │
│                    ▼                                 │
│  ┌───────────────────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │  REST Commands (configuration.yaml)           │  │
│  │  - letta_add_memory                          │  │
│  │  - letta_memory_maintenance                  │  │
│  └─────────────────┬─────────────────────────────┘  │
└────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────────┘
                     │ HTTP API
                     ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│           Letta Bridge API (Port 8081)              │
│  ┌───────────────────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │  FastAPI Endpoints (main.py)                  │  │
│  │  - /memory/add                                │  │
│  │  - /memory/search (semantic)                  │  │
│  │  - /memory/pin                                │  │
│  │  - /memory/forget                             │  │
│  │  - /memory/maintenance ← NEW                  │  │
│  │  - /daily_brief                               │  │
│  └─────────────────┬─────────────────────────────┘  │
└────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────────┘
                     │
         ┌───────────┴──────────┐
         ▼                      ▼
┌─────────────────┐    ┌─────────────────┐
│   PostgreSQL    │    │     Redis       │
│   + pgvector    │    │   (Cache)       │
│                 │    │                 │
│ - memory_blocks │    │ - Cooldowns     │
│ - embeddings    │    │ - Ephemeral     │
│ - agent_state   │    │                 │
└─────────────────┘    └─────────────────┘
```

## Memory Tiers & Retention

| Tier       | Retention | Auto-evicts | Use Case                |
|------------|-----------|-------------|-------------------------|
| session    | 1 hour    | Yes         | Temporary conversation  |
| short_term | 7 days    | Yes         | Recent events           |
| medium_term| 30 days   | Yes         | Important patterns      |
| long_term  | 365 days  | Yes         | Significant events      |
| permanent  | Forever   | No          | Critical information    |

## Data Flow Example

### Adding a Memory
1. **Trigger**: User comes home (person.home_owner: away → home)
2. **Automation**: `letta_log_important_events` triggers
3. **REST Command**: Calls `rest_command.letta_add_memory`
4. **API**: POST to `/memory/add` with:
   ```json
   {
     "title": "Presence Change: Home Owner",
     "content": "Home Owner changed from away to home at 2024-01-15 18:30:00",
     "tags": ["presence", "automation", "home_state"],
     "source": ["ha://person.home_owner"],
     "tier": "medium",
     "type": "event"
   }
   ```
5. **Database**: Memory stored in PostgreSQL
6. **Embedding**: Vector embedding generated for semantic search
7. **Redis**: Cooldown marker set (60 seconds)

### Daily Maintenance
1. **Trigger**: 3:00 AM daily
2. **Automation**: `letta_memory_maintenance` triggers
3. **REST Command**: Calls `rest_command.letta_memory_maintenance`
4. **API**: POST to `/memory/maintenance`
5. **Database**: Executes `evict_old_memories()` function
6. **Cleanup**: Removes memories based on:
   - Tier retention policies
   - last_used_at timestamps
   - Pin status (pinned memories never evicted)

## Performance Improvements

### Database Efficiency
- **Tiered Storage**: Old, unused memories automatically removed
- **Indexed Searches**: Fast retrieval with proper indexes
- **Vector Search**: Semantic similarity using pgvector

### Application Benefits
- **Context Retention**: LLM can reference past interactions
- **Pattern Learning**: System learns user preferences over time
- **Smart Eviction**: Important memories kept, noise removed
- **Resource Management**: Prevents unbounded growth

## Usage Examples

### From Home Assistant Automations
```yaml
- service: rest_command.letta_add_memory
  data:
    title: "Temperature Alert"
    content: "Living room reached 25°C"
    tier: "short"
    type: "event"
```

### From Python
```python
from example_memory_client import LettaMemoryClient

client = LettaMemoryClient()
client.add_memory(
    title="User Preference",
    content="Prefers warm lighting in evening",
    type="preference",
    tier="long",
    pin=True
)
```

### From curl
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8081/memory/add \
  -H "x-api-key: dev-key" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "title": "Quick Note",
    "content": "Remember to check garden sensors",
    "type": "task"
  }'
```

## Security Considerations

1. **API Key Authentication**: All endpoints require valid `x-api-key` header
2. **Internal Network**: Services communicate on private Docker network
3. **Database Credentials**: Secured via environment variables
4. **No External Access**: Memory system not exposed to internet by default

## Next Steps / Future Enhancements

1. **LLM Integration**: Direct integration with Ollama for memory summarization
2. **Smart Promotion**: Automatically promote frequently accessed memories
3. **Deduplication**: Merge similar memories to reduce redundancy
4. **Visualization**: Dashboard for viewing memory hierarchy
5. **Backup/Restore**: Tools for exporting/importing memory snapshots
6. **Analytics**: Memory usage metrics and insights

## Troubleshooting

### Check if services are running
```bash
docker ps | grep -E "(letta-bridge|postgres|redis)"
```

### View logs
```bash
docker logs hassistant-letta-bridge
docker logs hassistant-postgres
docker logs hassistant-redis
```

### Test connectivity
```bash
curl http://localhost:8081/healthz
```

### Check database
```bash
docker exec -it hassistant-postgres psql -U hassistant -d hassistant -c "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM memory_blocks;"
```

## Shared Integration Variables

The memory stack now shares configuration with automation agents. Ensure `.env` includes:

- `VISION_GATEWAY_URL` so verification scripts can confirm the vision service endpoint that feeds memories.
- `WINDOWS_VOICE_CONTROL_URL` so downstream agents that replay memories via voice can use the shared HTTP bridge.

The `tests/verify_memory_integration.sh` helper checks for these variables in addition to the database settings.

## References

- **Main Documentation**: [MEMORY_INTEGRATION.md](MEMORY_INTEGRATION.md)
- **API Source**: [letta_bridge/main.py](letta_bridge/main.py)
- **Database Schema**: [scripts/02_letta_schema.sql](scripts/02_letta_schema.sql)
- **HA Config**: [ha_config/configuration.yaml](ha_config/configuration.yaml)
- **Automations**: [ha_config/automations.yaml](ha_config/automations.yaml)
- **Example Client**: [example_memory_client.py](example_memory_client.py)

---

**Integration completed**: All components tested and working
**Status**: ✅ Production Ready
