docs/implementation/memory-integration-pr.md, before:

# Memory Integration Pull Request Summary

## Overview

This pull request implements complete memory integration for HAssistant using a Letta-inspired architecture with PostgreSQL + pgvector for semantic search and Redis for session caching.

## What's Included

### Core Services

1. **Letta Bridge API** (`letta_bridge/`)
   - FastAPI service on port 8081
   - RESTful endpoints for memory operations
   - Vector similarity search
   - Automatic embedding generation (placeholder - replace with real model)

2. **PostgreSQL with pgvector** 
   - Version: PostgreSQL 15 with pgvector extension
   - Port: 5433 (to avoid conflicts)
   - Vector dimension: 1536 (OpenAI ada-002 compatible)
   - Automatic schema initialization via SQL scripts

3. **Redis Cache**
   - Version: Redis 7 Alpine
   - Port: 6380 (to avoid conflicts)
   - Password-protected
   - AOF persistence enabled

### API Endpoints

| Endpoint | Method | Description |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| `/healthz` | GET | Health check |
| `/memory/add` | POST | Create new memory |
| `/memory/search` | GET | Semantic memory search |
| `/memory/pin` | POST | Pin important memory |
| `/memory/forget` | POST | Demote/forget memory |
| `/daily_brief` | GET | Daily memory summary |
| `/metrics` | GET | Service metrics (stub) |

### Database Schema

**Core Tables:**
- `memory_blocks` - Main memory storage with tiered retention
- `memory_embeddings` - Vector embeddings for semantic search
- `agent_state` - Letta agent state persistence

**Legacy Compatibility Tables:**
- `conversations` - Conversation logs
- `messages` - Individual messages
- `user_preferences` - User preference storage
- `entities` - Named entity tracking
- `session_analytics` - Session analytics

### Memory Tiers

| Tier | Retention | Use Case |
|------|-----------|----------|
| session | 1 hour | Current conversation |
| short_term | 7 days | Recent interactions |
| medium_term | 30 days | Important recent facts |
| long_term | 1 year | Significant knowledge |
| permanent | Forever | Core facts (never evicted) |

### Documentation

1. **MEMORY_INTEGRATION.md** - Complete architecture and usage guide
   - API documentation
   - Database schema details
   - Deployment instructions
   - Troubleshooting guide
   - Integration examples

2. **.env.example** - Environment variable template
   - All required configuration
   - Security recommendations
   - Default values

3. **README.md** - Updated with memory integration section
   - Quick start examples
   - Architecture diagram
   - Project structure

### Testing & Verification

1. **test_memory_integration.py** - Integration test suite
   - Tests all API endpoints
   - Health checks
   - Memory CRUD operations
   - Search functionality

2. **verify_memory_integration.sh** - Setup verification script
   - 39 automated checks
   - File existence verification
   - Configuration validation
   - Service definition checks

## Key Features

### 🧠 Semantic Search
- Vector embeddings with pgvector
- Cosine similarity search
- IVFFlat indexing for performance
- Filtering by tier, type, tags

### 🔄 Tiered Memory System
- Automatic eviction based on tier retention
- Pin protection for important memories
- Manual tier promotion
- Confidence scoring

### 📊 Full-text Search
- GIN indexes on title and content
- Tag-based filtering
- Metadata search

### 🔒 Security
- API key authentication
- Password-protected Redis
- Parameterized SQL queries
- No exposed credentials

### 🏥 Health Monitoring
- Health checks for all services
- Proper dependency ordering
- Automatic restart policies
- Service health conditions

## Configuration

### Environment Variables

```bash
# PostgreSQL
POSTGRES_PASSWORD=your_secure_password
LETTA_PG_URI=postgresql://hassistant:password@hassistant-postgres:5432/hassistant

# Redis
REDIS_PASSWORD=your_secure_password
LETTA_REDIS_URL=redis://:password@hassistant-redis:6379/0

# Letta Bridge
BRIDGE_API_KEY=your_secure_api_key
EMBED_DIM=1536
DAILY_BRIEF_WINDOW_HOURS=24
```

## Deployment

### Quick Start

```bash
# 1. Configure environment
cp .env.example .env
# Edit .env with your values

# 2. Start services
docker compose up -d

# 3. Verify services
docker compose ps
docker compose logs letta-bridge

# 4. Run verification
./verify_memory_integration.sh

# 5. Test API
python3 test_memory_integration.py
```

### Service Dependencies

```mermaid
graph TD
    A[PostgreSQL] -->|health check| C[Letta Bridge]
    B[Redis] -->|health check| C
    C -->|API| D[Qwen Agent]
    C -->|API| E[Home Assistant]
```

## Database Initialization

SQL scripts run automatically on first PostgreSQL startup:

1. `01_enable_pgvector.sql` - Enable pgvector extension
2. `02_letta_schema.sql` - Core Letta tables and functions
3. `03_legacy_schema.sql` - Backward compatibility
4. `04_indexes.sql` - Performance optimization

## Performance Optimization

### Indexes
- **GIN indexes**: Array and JSONB fields (tags, meta, source)
- **IVFFlat index**: Vector similarity search (100 lists)
- **btree indexes**: Filtering and sorting (tier, type, timestamps)
- **Full-text search**: PostgreSQL tsvector

### Caching
- Redis session cache
- Connection pooling (1-5 connections)
- Prepared statement caching

## Integration Points

### Qwen Agent
- Memory operations via REST API
- Context retrieval before response generation
- Automatic memory creation for important facts

### Home Assistant
- Event-driven memory creation
- User preference storage
- Entity tracking

## Verification Results

```bash
$ ./verify_memory_integration.sh

✓ All 39 checks passed!

Checks include:
- Docker Compose configuration
- Letta Bridge service files
- Database initialization scripts
- Environment configuration
- Documentation completeness
- Test infrastructure
- Service definitions
- Python dependencies
- API endpoints
- Healthchecks
```

## Next Steps

After deployment:

1. ✅ Verify all services are healthy
2. ✅ Run integration tests
3. ⚠️ Replace fake embedding function with real model (sentence-transformers, Ollama embeddings, etc.)
4. ⚠️ Configure backup strategy for PostgreSQL
5. ⚠️ Set up monitoring/alerting
6. ⚠️ Review and rotate API keys
7. ⚠️ Implement rate limiting (if needed)
8. ⚠️ Add memory usage analytics

## Future Enhancements

- [ ] Real embedding model integration
- [ ] Memory consolidation (merge similar memories)
- [ ] Importance scoring with decay
- [ ] Graph-based memory relationships
- [ ] Export/import functionality
- [ ] Web UI for memory management
- [ ] A/B testing of embedding models
- [ ] Advanced analytics dashboard

## Breaking Changes

None - This is a new feature addition that doesn't affect existing functionality.

## Migration Guide

No migration required for new installations. Existing deployments can add memory services without affecting other components.

## Security Considerations

1. ✅ API key authentication for Letta Bridge
2. ✅ Password protection for Redis
3. ✅ Password protection for PostgreSQL
4. ✅ Parameterized SQL queries (no SQL injection)
5. ✅ No hardcoded credentials in code
6. ⚠️ Review default passwords in .env.example (they must be changed!)
7. ⚠️ Consider TLS/SSL for production deployments
8. ⚠️ Implement rate limiting for public APIs

## Testing

### Automated Tests
- `test_memory_integration.py` - 6 endpoint tests
- `verify_memory_integration.sh` - 39 configuration checks

### Manual Testing
```bash
# Health check
curl -H "x-api-key: dev-key" http://localhost:8081/healthz

# Add memory
curl -X POST http://localhost:8081/memory/add \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -H "x-api-key: dev-key" \
  -d '{
    "type": "fact",
    "title": "Test",
    "content": "Test memory",
    "tier": "short"
  }'

# Search memories
curl "http://localhost:8081/memory/search?q=test&k=5" \
  -H "x-api-key: dev-key"
```

## License

MIT License - See LICENSE file for details

## Contributors

- Built with Claude Code assistance
- Inspired by Letta (formerly MemGPT)

## Support

For issues or questions:
1. Check MEMORY_INTEGRATION.md documentation
2. Run verify_memory_integration.sh
3. Check service logs: `docker compose logs letta-bridge`
4. Open an issue on GitHub

Commit message:

Harmonize shared voice/vision integration across services

docs/implementation/memory-integration-pr.md, after:

# Memory Integration Pull Request Summary

## Overview

This pull request implements complete memory integration for HAssistant using a Letta-inspired architecture with PostgreSQL + pgvector for semantic search and Redis for session caching.

## What's Included

### Core Services

1. **Letta Bridge API** (`letta_bridge/`)
   - FastAPI service on port 8081
   - RESTful endpoints for memory operations
   - Vector similarity search
   - Automatic embedding generation (placeholder - replace with real model)

2. **PostgreSQL with pgvector** 
   - Version: PostgreSQL 15 with pgvector extension
   - Port: 5433 (to avoid conflicts)
   - Vector dimension: 1536 (OpenAI ada-002 compatible)
   - Automatic schema initialization via SQL scripts

3. **Redis Cache**
   - Version: Redis 7 Alpine
   - Port: 6380 (to avoid conflicts)
   - Password-protected
   - AOF persistence enabled

### API Endpoints

| Endpoint | Method | Description |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| `/healthz` | GET | Health check |
| `/memory/add` | POST | Create new memory |
| `/memory/search` | GET | Semantic memory search |
| `/memory/pin` | POST | Pin important memory |
| `/memory/forget` | POST | Demote/forget memory |
| `/daily_brief` | GET | Daily memory summary |
| `/metrics` | GET | Service metrics (stub) |

### Database Schema

**Core Tables:**
- `memory_blocks` - Main memory storage with tiered retention
- `memory_embeddings` - Vector embeddings for semantic search
- `agent_state` - Letta agent state persistence

**Legacy Compatibility Tables:**
- `conversations` - Conversation logs
- `messages` - Individual messages
- `user_preferences` - User preference storage
- `entities` - Named entity tracking
- `session_analytics` - Session analytics

### Memory Tiers

| Tier | Retention | Use Case |
|------|-----------|----------|
| session | 1 hour | Current conversation |
| short_term | 7 days | Recent interactions |
| medium_term | 30 days | Important recent facts |
| long_term | 1 year | Significant knowledge |
| permanent | Forever | Core facts (never evicted) |

### Documentation

1. **MEMORY_INTEGRATION.md** - Complete architecture and usage guide
   - API documentation
   - Database schema details
   - Deployment instructions
   - Troubleshooting guide
   - Integration examples

2. **.env.example** - Environment variable template
   - All required configuration
   - Security recommendations
   - Default values

3. **README.md** - Updated with memory integration section
   - Quick start examples
   - Architecture diagram
   - Project structure

### Testing & Verification

1. **test_memory_integration.py** - Integration test suite
   - Tests all API endpoints
   - Health checks
   - Memory CRUD operations
   - Search functionality

2. **verify_memory_integration.sh** - Setup verification script
   - 39 automated checks
   - File existence verification
   - Configuration validation
   - Service definition checks

## Key Features

### 🧠 Semantic Search
- Vector embeddings with pgvector
- Cosine similarity search
- IVFFlat indexing for performance
- Filtering by tier, type, tags

### 🔄 Tiered Memory System
- Automatic eviction based on tier retention
- Pin protection for important memories
- Manual tier promotion
- Confidence scoring

### 📊 Full-text Search
- GIN indexes on title and content
- Tag-based filtering
- Metadata search

### 🔒 Security
- API key authentication
- Password-protected Redis
- Parameterized SQL queries
- No exposed credentials

### 🏥 Health Monitoring
- Health checks for all services
- Proper dependency ordering
- Automatic restart policies
- Service health conditions

## Configuration

### Environment Variables

```bash
# PostgreSQL
POSTGRES_PASSWORD=your_secure_password
LETTA_PG_URI=postgresql://hassistant:password@hassistant-postgres:5432/hassistant

# Redis
REDIS_PASSWORD=your_secure_password
LETTA_REDIS_URL=redis://:password@hassistant-redis:6379/0

# Letta Bridge
BRIDGE_API_KEY=your_secure_api_key
EMBED_DIM=1536
DAILY_BRIEF_WINDOW_HOURS=24
```

## Deployment

### Quick Start

```bash
# 1. Configure environment
cp .env.example .env
# Edit .env with your values

# 2. Start services
docker compose up -d

# 3. Verify services
docker compose ps
docker compose logs letta-bridge

# 4. Run verification
./verify_memory_integration.sh

# 5. Test API
python3 test_memory_integration.py
```

### Service Dependencies

```mermaid
graph TD
    A[PostgreSQL] -->|health check| C[Letta Bridge]
    B[Redis] -->|health check| C
    C -->|API| D[Qwen Agent]
    C -->|API| E[Home Assistant]
```

## Database Initialization

SQL scripts run automatically on first PostgreSQL startup:

1. `01_enable_pgvector.sql` - Enable pgvector extension
2. `02_letta_schema.sql` - Core Letta tables and functions
3. `03_legacy_schema.sql` - Backward compatibility
4. `04_indexes.sql` - Performance optimization

## Performance Optimization

### Indexes
- **GIN indexes**: Array and JSONB fields (tags, meta, source)
- **IVFFlat index**: Vector similarity search (100 lists)
- **btree indexes**: Filtering and sorting (tier, type, timestamps)
- **Full-text search**: PostgreSQL tsvector

### Caching
- Redis session cache
- Connection pooling (1-5 connections)
- Prepared statement caching

## Integration Points

### Qwen Agent
- Memory operations via REST API
- Context retrieval before response generation
- Automatic memory creation for important facts

### Home Assistant
- Event-driven memory creation
- User preference storage
- Entity tracking

## Verification Results

```bash
$ ./verify_memory_integration.sh

✓ All 39 checks passed!

Checks include:
- Docker Compose configuration
- Letta Bridge service files
- Database initialization scripts
- Environment configuration
- Documentation completeness
- Test infrastructure
- Service definitions
- Python dependencies
- API endpoints
- Healthchecks
```

## Shared Integration Variables

The verification script now enforces the presence of the cross-service variables `VISION_GATEWAY_URL` and `WINDOWS_VOICE_CONTROL_URL` in `.env`. These values keep the memory tooling aligned with the automation agents that depend on the shared vision and voice clients.

## Next Steps

After deployment:

1. ✅ Verify all services are healthy
2. ✅ Run integration tests
3. ⚠️ Replace fake embedding function with real model (sentence-transformers, Ollama embeddings, etc.)
4. ⚠️ Configure backup strategy for PostgreSQL
5. ⚠️ Set up monitoring/alerting
6. ⚠️ Review and rotate API keys
7. ⚠️ Implement rate limiting (if needed)
8. ⚠️ Add memory usage analytics

## Future Enhancements

- [ ] Real embedding model integration
- [ ] Memory consolidation (merge similar memories)
- [ ] Importance scoring with decay
- [ ] Graph-based memory relationships
- [ ] Export/import functionality
- [ ] Web UI for memory management
- [ ] A/B testing of embedding models
- [ ] Advanced analytics dashboard

## Breaking Changes

None - This is a new feature addition that doesn't affect existing functionality.

## Migration Guide

No migration required for new installations. Existing deployments can add memory services without affecting other components.

## Security Considerations

1. ✅ API key authentication for Letta Bridge
2. ✅ Password protection for Redis
3. ✅ Password protection for PostgreSQL
4. ✅ Parameterized SQL queries (no SQL injection)
5. ✅ No hardcoded credentials in code
6. ⚠️ Review default passwords in .env.example (they must be changed!)
7. ⚠️ Consider TLS/SSL for production deployments
8. ⚠️ Implement rate limiting for public APIs

## Testing

### Automated Tests
- `test_memory_integration.py` - 6 endpoint tests
- `verify_memory_integration.sh` - 39 configuration checks

### Manual Testing
```bash
# Health check
curl -H "x-api-key: dev-key" http://localhost:8081/healthz

# Add memory
curl -X POST http://localhost:8081/memory/add \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -H "x-api-key: dev-key" \
  -d '{
    "type": "fact",
    "title": "Test",
    "content": "Test memory",
    "tier": "short"
  }'

# Search memories
curl "http://localhost:8081/memory/search?q=test&k=5" \
  -H "x-api-key: dev-key"
```

## License

MIT License - See LICENSE file for details

## Contributors

- Built with Claude Code assistance
- Inspired by Letta (formerly MemGPT)

## Support

For issues or questions:
1. Check MEMORY_INTEGRATION.md documentation
2. Run verify_memory_integration.sh
3. Check service logs: `docker compose logs letta-bridge`
4. Open an issue on GitHub
